# SWEDDIE & DeepSoil2100
This is the central repository for the Synthesizing Warming Experiments to Depth Data Integration Effort (SWEDDIE). SWEDDIE is a development of the [DeepSoil2100 project](https://iscn.fluxdata.org/network/partner-networks/deepsoil2100/), a global effort to synthesize data from ecosystem warming experiments with a particular emphasis on those with documented warming extending into the subsoil.

# Project Overview
SWEDDIE was conceived in order to bring together data from soil warming experiments worldwide, focusing on those with documented warming of at least 1 °C to a minimum depth of 0.2 m, and with a minimum warming duration of 1 y. The data from these studies will be compiled in a new database designed with [FAIR](https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2016.18) (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable) principles to be flexible with regards to data ingestion, and support user-friendly querying and reporting tools. The experiments span a wide range of climate, vegetation, and edaphic conditions as well as a range of heating levels, positioning this database to provide strong constraints on global model predictions of future soil C stock changes. Furthermore, synthesizing these data offers a unique opportunity to identify improved metrics for quantifying soil warming impacts on specific biogeochemical processes.

Harmonizing raw data from disparate experiments, sensors, and with distinct data structures (or data models) is a major challenge in data synthesis. Drawing on the example of previous successful soil databases such as [ISCN](https://iscn.fluxdata.org/), [ISRaD](https://soilradiocarbon.org/), [COSORE](https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.15353), [SIDb](https://doi.org/10.5194/essd-12-1511-2020), SWEDDIE is an implicitly relational database consisting of linked hierarchical tables. In SWEDDIE, the central linkage across levels of the hierarchy is the site from which the data were measured. However, departing from these previous examples, the SWEDDIE database largely consists of annotated metadata tables rather than actual measured data values. This approach is designed to be maximally flexible with regards to the types of data accessible through the database and to enable the generation of any number of permutations of the data, i.e., "reports", each of which corresponds to a unique user-defined query specifying the specific sites, variables, and variable extents desired.

Please see [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1WJG0aMsWCtgKBZNhEdShztkWBi-uEmywx2NxOT5R2zQ/edit?usp=sharing) for a more in-depth description of the SWEDDIE data model and further background information on the DeepSoil2100 synthesis project.

## SWEDDIE Data
The SWEDDIE data model consists of three static "core" data tables and their accompanying metadata tables (templates for these tables can be found in the [data/metadata](https://github.com/jb388/eco-warm/blob/main/data/metadata) directory), as well as limitless "dat" files containing measurement values. Each "dat" file is accompanied by an annotation file containing the keys necessary to translate the data into a harmonized, queriable format (see the [data/metadata](https://github.com/jb388/eco-warm/blob/main/data/metadata) directory for examples). Core data tables and dat annotation files are hosted here, organized by site ([data/metadata](https://github.com/jb388/eco-warm/blob/main/data/sweddie)). However, the "dat" files contain both public and non-public data and therefore are hosted externally on a non-public server for now. Data releases in the form of specific reports may be published here or in a separate public repository in the future. 

## SWEDDIE Code
Development of SWEDDIE is implemented in R. The codebase currently consists of scripts to compile core data (see below for data model description), as well as utility functions to wrangle data and read data files from external repository sources. This codebase is under active development.

## Citations
To cite the respository you may click the "cite this repository" link above.
